[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Man has made the planet and
everything on it his subject.
Livestock supply us with
meat, milk, and leather.
Around 2 million years ago, when
our ancestors were beginning
to walk upright across
the African plains,
an energy-rich food
was discovered--
meat.
>> It started with erectus
and early homo with cutting
the meat with stone
tools, grinding the meat,
pounding the meat.
>> Vegans don't eat
meat, don't drink milk,
and even deny themselves
that breakfast egg.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> For me, consuming milk and
other dairy products as animal
cruelty.
It doesn't matter if it's
conventional, organic,
or biodynamic milk.
>> For most city dwellers, their
only contact with livestock is
when they drink some milk or
the steak is already sizzling
in the pan, and I'm one of them.
I love cooking.
Many vegans manage without using
any animal products at all.
Does this mean they have
a healthier, better life?
In the US, the vegan wave has
long since become a tsunami.
It's a billion-dollar industry.
No wonder the first
biotech company
settled in California,
developing [INAUDIBLE]
meat and dairy products.
So is veganism really
healthier and more ethical
and environmentally friendly
than the consumption
of mass-produced meat products?
Between the Place de la
Bastille and the Place de la
Nation in Paris, the [FRENCH]
takes place six times a week.
France's culinary specialties
can all be found here.
The daily market is a temple
of the French way of life
and culture, a culinary culture
that is admired across Europe,
even across the whole world.
Deborah Pivain is a great
admirer of French cuisine.
The American has been living
in Paris for almost 40 years,
and demonstrated her
American pioneering spirit
when she opened a gourmet
vegan restaurant in Paris.
>> Actually opening a vegan
restaurant in Paris meant
mastering absolutely a vegan
cuisine and French cuisine.
And people, what they
love about French food
is the essence,
the spirit of it.
It's the technique,
very good products,
and a whole history of tastes
and textures and sensation.
So because I love the foundation
of what vegan means and I love
Paris, putting the two
together was just as perfect
as you can get.
>> As vegans use no
animal products at all,
they often make do with
plant-based dairy substitutes
in the kitchen.
Are they as easy to cook with
as our standard dairy products?
>> We have no problem
making [INAUDIBLE]..
Cakes, the macaroon,
the pate chaud,
which is used to make
eclairs, no problem.
People were ecstatic about it.
And where would we
have difficulties?
Well, cheeses are the only thing
that we are still youngsters
at.
And it's just going to
take a little bit of time,
a little bit of chemistry
to learn how to make them
with all the variety,
because the French still
have 486 varieties of cheese.
So it's taken over
a thousand years
to do that, it's going to
take us a couple of years.
>> Vegan cuisine is
unbelievably diverse.
It has to be.
All animal products are
replaced with plant-based ones.
Those who want the
flavor of a schnitzel
do not have to forgo the taste.
The secret is in the
spices and the technique
that enables you to replicate
the consistency of meat.
After all, you eat
with your eyes, too.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Firm and tasty.
>> This is pizza dough that
you put into water and kneed.
It takes up the starch.
Then you're left with
a mass that you can fry
and which tastes like pork.
Even dessert is not
something vegan chefs
have to shy away from.
It just tastes different.
White vegan chocolate.
With this skill,
there are always
new delights for the
palate to be discovered.
The vegan kitchen is in no way
behind conventional cuisine.
Either it tastes or it doesn't.
But as there is more to
eating than just nutrition,
it's worth taking a look behind
the scenes of a vegan kitchen.
The blue lupine is
a special plant.
Farmers used it as a
protein-rich pig feed.
It was very bitter, which is
why the pigs didn't like it.
The Fraunhofer Institute
for processing technology
and packaging has upgraded the
local plant to a sweet lupine
and made it suitable
for human consumption.
Lupine seeds are flaked and
undergo several processing
stages so the rich
protein can be extracted.
An established technique that
proved useful in developing
the process was decaffeination.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> To extract the protein
from sweet lupines,
they first need to be de-oiled,
similar to the soybean.
Usually various solvents
are used with soya
to remove the oil.
We wanted to find a more
environmentally-friendly
alternative and stumbled
across the overcritical CO2.
It is used for extracting
the caffeine from coffee.
With the new lupines,
we use it to remove
the oil and other aromas and
improve the plant's taste.
>> It was through cultivation,
not by means of genetic
modification, that the
scientists succeeded
in reducing the bitterness
of the sweet lupine.
This gives us a protein that
can be turned into lupine milk.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Proteins are
nice and flaky now.
Those who want to make a
milk substitute not only
need more protein, but
also oil and sugar.
Adding water produces
a white liquid that
can be processed like milk.
Lupine milk-- competition
for any dairy farmer.
But since the milk prices
have hit rock bottom,
the farmer is grateful
for any alternatives.
More and more farmers
are considering
growing the sweet lupine.
it makes economic
sense, especially
in the sandy soil in
Northeast Germany,
the sweet lupine
is now en vogue.
As a new field crop, the lupine
takes nitrogen from the air
and passes it onto the subsoil.
For this reason,
farmer Sebastian Grewe
barely needs any pesticides
and still has a larger harvest.
[SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Next year there will
be rye growing here,
and we can assume that we will
generate 150 euros more from
the areas where we
had lupines growing.
For farmer Grewe and his
client, Marc Zillmann,
it's a win-win situation.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> The sweet lupine is
an indigenous plant,
so we can use protein
from the region.
It's also a great
functional plant
that can really produce milk.
Just imagine, you have
milk that's made of water,
milk fat, milk protein,
milk sugar, and all of that
needs to be reproduced if
you want a milk substitute.
The sweet lupine seeds are
easy to store and process.
This is about 30 tons.
What can you make from 30 tons?
30 tons make about
150,000 liters of milk,
so that it's quite effective.
Only a few kilometers from the
fields where the lupine grew,
the lupine milk is produced.
This is where the basis for
lupine yogurt, lupine cocoa,
and lupine ice cream is made.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Lupine milk can be used
just like normal milk that
comes from a cow.
I can make my rice pudding with
it, I can eat it with my muesli
or drink it cold
out of the fridge.
There's no limits
to how I can use it.
That's the advantage, as I
don't have to give anything up.
Plant-based nutrition
is no longer
associated with sacrifice,
but with pleasure.
Although the lupine
platter is limited,
there are ecological benefits
to the local lupine not offered
by other important protein-rich
alternatives, such as soya.
35 million tons of soya are
imported by the EU each year,
mainly from South America.
Most of it is for
livestock fodder.
Large areas of rainforest
have been burnt down
to make way to farm the
monoculture, surface areas that
once soaked up CO2.
The majority of the beans have
been genetically modified,
yet the need for new
pesticides does not abate.
Soy is an important raw
material for many food products,
such as baked goods, dairy
products, and cereal bars.
To process the beans
into protein products,
they need to be de-oiled.
So far, the oil is dissolved
in the toxic chemical hexane,
which is not only harmful
for the environment,
but highly flammable.
Ecologically
sustainable it is not.
In many ways, Berlin
is setting precedents.
At the moment, the
German metropolis
is proving to be the
vegan capital of Europe.
Jan Bredack, a former manager
from the automobile industry,
is now head of a vegan
supermarket chain
and embodies this
trend like no other.
He wants to earn money
with his enterprise,
but at the same time make
the world a better place.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> For 35 years, I myself
drank liters of milk according
to the old tradition.
It's healthy.
Because my grandmother always
said that if I ate my dairy,
I'd grow strong.
These are rituals passed down,
conditioned modes of behavior.
For me, it was the
old moment when
you have this picture of a
cow that stands in the fields
and eats grass and
gives milk, and then
when you realize that it's
a mother's milk that she's
giving, that picture is ruined.
You've realized that we
inseminate cows, take
their calves away from
them, slaughter them,
and then the cows stand
there for five years
before they're sent to
the abattoir themselves.
These are the things
where you say,
if only I'd know that earlier.
And these things happen.
For me it was a
wake-up call, and I
think it's happening to a
lot of people at the moment.
Bredack wants to combine
ethical principles
with business
principles, and that
seems to be working very well.
Matcha tea is the latest craze.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> 12 grams, and when
we're at 120 grams,
that's enough for 10 shots.
>> Cheers.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Fundamentally you can
say that we are a niche.
We come from a movement that
protested to our society
about food.
That's where
veganism comes from.
For 20, 30 years, it was,
I'm different, you're shit,
I'm better because
I eat differently.
That was the elitist
claim to be different.
What we did is that we
opened up the vegan world
and made plant-based nutrition
accessible to the masses.
We tore down barriers
and the preconceptions,
and what is happening
now is remarkable.
Many people are coming to us who
aren't vegan, nor vegetarian,
they're just curious
to try the products,
and that brings in consumers.
We're tripling our
revenue every year.
Whilst Jan Bredack
ratchets up his revenue,
scientists in the
Max Planck Institute
for Evolutionary
Anthropology in Leipzig
are studying the
deeper motivations
of human eating behavior.
Why do people eat meat
and other animal products?
Jean-Jacques Hublin
is finding the answers
in the prehistory
of human evolution.
The anthropologist
delves deep into the past
when apes were slowly
becoming humans.
>> Our brain is about five
times the size it should be
for a mammal our
size, our body size.
And the brain is a
very expensive tissue
in terms of energy.
It takes about 20% for what we
call basal metabolism, which
is energy we produce
at rest, and this
is consumed by an organ
that represent only 2%
of the body, so a huge cost.
>> Our early ancestors were
herbivore apes that lived
in the trees.
2 million years
ago, Homo erectus
was hunting small living
animals on the forest floor,
and brain size increased.
Our ancestor would cut the meat
from the bones with small stone
tools.
But the second spectacular phase
of the brain growth of the Homo
only happened after the
discovery of fire and cooking
over 500,000 years ago.
>> The reason why cooking is
so important is because cooking
facilitates the way we can
incorporate this high energy,
this food high and rich in
energy, especially meat.
And then we see another,
I would say, acceleration
into the brain size in hominids.
In the course of the
last 5 billion years,
there is a spectacular
increase of the brain
size without any related
increases in the body size.
So the proportion between
brain and body change again.
>> By studying the
isotopes in human bones,
the scientists can ascertain
what humans were eating 500,000
years ago.
And it becomes evident.
From an evolutionary
perspective,
our metabolism is
still in the Stone Age.
We are good at storing
fat for bad times.
But as we no longer have to
hunt for the food ourselves,
but more often than not sit
lazily on the sofa, we get ill.
Our extremely high energy diet
combined with little movement
causes civilization diseases
such as cancer or diabetes.
>> But modern societies
are face a new challenge,
which is changing our diet
another time and somehow
designing a new way of fueling
our body and our brain,
which is still needs
energy, but in, I would say,
a more reasonable way
considering the way of life
modern humans have today.
>> The way we're living at
the moment is clearly not
compatible with our
evolutionary heritage.
Many of us are
too fat and suffer
from all types of
civilization diseases
that are connected to our diet.
At the Veggie World
Trade Fair in Paris,
the healthy diet of
veganism is celebrated.
But how healthy is
being vegan really?
Swantje Tomafak, the organizer
of the fair, thinks she knows.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH] essentially
means you cut something out
for health reasons, as
with veganism generally.
But especially in France,
many organizations
are concerning themselves
by talking more about it.
Many people don't know what
to do with the word veganism.
For them, it is a question
of if we can't eat meat, then
what do we eat?
>> At the trade fair, the
exhibitors are doing their best
to convince people
of the opposite.
The vegan delicacies on
offer are overwhelming,
although this says little
about the taste and health
benefits of vegan food.
The use of flavor
enhancers, sugars, and fats
can easily be compared
to conventional cuisine.
Nevertheless, the
French seem curious.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Generally, Germany is
more advanced than the French
market.
This is because a lot more
work needs to be done here
educating people.
This is starting with the recent
media reports about scandals
in organic slaughterhouses
where animals
were treated very cruelly.
A while ago, these pictures
wouldn't even reach the public.
>> It is the unbridled truth
about modern milk and animal
production which drives
consumers to make more
conscientious choices.
Cosmetics, shoes,
T-shirts, all made
without any animal products.
But going completely without
animal products despite all the
urging to do so is not
as easy as it may seem.
We were at Lake Constance.
Anna-Lena Klapp has
made herself at home
along the Swiss banks in
Kreuzlingen. The vegan
blogger wants to take a
closer look at the first vegan
hotel in Europe.
The Hotel Swiss in Kreuzlingen
is the first of its kind.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I want to get my key.
>> Number 31, third floor.
>> Thank you.
>> From a rich vegan breakfast
to chair upholstery and soft
pillows, no meat, no milk,
no leather, no goose down--
a vegan's dream.
There's a wide choice of
vegan alternative products,
from milk to cheese.
There's a substitute
for everything,
as even some vegetarians
have a problem with cheese.
But why?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Vegetarians who are
vegetarian because they do not
want animals to die because
of them get into an ethical
dilemma when it comes to cheese.
Many cheeses contain rennet,
which comes from calve stomach
and for which the
calves need to die,
which means a lot of cheeses
aren't even vegetarian.
>> But why do vegans even try
to imitate these types of food?
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> You're used to eating cheese
for breakfast and seek familiar
products, especially in the
changeover phase when you begin
to eat vegan.
Animal ethics doesn't
come cheap, especially not
in the hotel business.
Any recognition goes a long way.
Banishing all animal products
makes the hand soap as well as
the bedclothes more expensive.
Goose down is not a necessity,
and even the staunchest vegan
can sleep easily.
And bloggers like
Anna-Lena ensure
that word gets
around where vegans
can find a good night's rest.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Are you thirsty?
How about a cool drink?
>> Yes, please.
>> We've got the
highest quality.
>> Is it local?
>> Yes, it's all
local vegetables.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And you even do it
with the stem and all?
>> Even with the stem.
>> OK.
>> Cheers.
Nice that you're here.
Once the initial
formalities are over
and the quality of the
ingredients is fitting,
the world of new
flavors can begin.
The added bonus that there is a
focus on local produce combined
with an ethical principles
is a win-win situation
that wasn't even clear
at the beginning.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In the beginning, we wondered
whether the vegan concept would
be a disadvantage for a hotel.
But in this border
region, the vegan concept
has been an economic
chance to fill a niche
and makes absolute
business sense.
The vegan wave is
bringing new customers
to businesses that are adapting,
but can the business also
be deadly?
Every now and
again, the public is
shocked by stories
of young children
who were vegan and
died from malnutrition.
Can a purely vegan diet be
dangerous or even lethal?
Why did these
children have to die?
In Germany, scientists
are seeking answers
to these questions.
Professor Bernhard Watzl
is head of the Max Rubener
Institute for Physiology and
Biochemistry of Nutrition.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Infants, small children
are growing organisms.
Compared to adults,
it's very important
that all necessary nutrients are
amply supplied in their diet.
The need is especially
high in small children,
and an important
example is vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 is found in
meat, fish, eggs, and milk.
A B12 deficiency causes
tiredness, weakness,
and depression, and can
lead to irreparable damage
in the central nervous system.
Many dairy substitutes
contain artificial B12.
A chemical analysis shows a high
level of industrial processing
in these substitute foods.
They are an artificial
mix of substances
that try to emulate the
original, a mix that's
not necessarily healthier.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> There's no scientific study
that shows it's healthier
to not drink milk, and
ultimately one food product
won't determine whether
your diet is healthy or not.
Diversity is important.
I need the vegetable part,
I need the meat part.
I can have a healthy diet
without the animal parts,
but then I'm in a situation
where I need supplements.
That's necessary if you
want to have a diet that's
entirely plant-based.
Nature really did intend for
us to have a mixed diet, not
to the extent that we are
eating animal products today--
we obviously have too much,
but some meat in our diet
is an essential
foundation if you want
to eat without supplements.
So vegans are healthy when
they use a toothpaste that
contains B12, for example.
Or they take vitamin
tablets every day.
For many, it's a better
alternative to consuming milk.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Alternatives that readily
replace the function of milk
are usually less
beneficial in their makeup.
They don't have the
same concentration
of the vital nutrients, are
often technologically produced,
and less beneficial to
one's health in comparison
to the makeup of milk.
Highly processed food does
not have the reputation
of being healthy.
Daniela Krehl, consumer
protectionist, explains.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Soya was the first
milk substitute.
Now a wealth of other
substitutes have been found.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And have you
looked what's in them?
>> Yes.
One tries to imitate milk
by adding flavorings,
but also certain vitamins
that are in milk, whether it's
calcium or B12.
These are vitamins
that are vital when
one is on a vegan diet.
And there is, of course,
sugar to give it more flavor.
Around a cube of sugar
for every 100 milliliters.
These recipes are trying to
emulate milk and its nutrients.
>> These chemical
recipes are expensive,
and there are still problems
with the taste of substitute
cheese.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Many vegans miss cheese.
The base ingredient
is a type of oil.
So you need plant oil so it
looks like cheese and tastes
like cheese, and you can't
do that without additives.
>> And what are the additives?
>> First you need a thickener
so the oil becomes a solid mass,
and then natural coloring so it
has a nice yellow cheese color.
More important is that you
can't do it without flavorings,
as plant oil doesn't
taste like cheese,
which is the taste
we're trying to imitate.
>> As vegan cheese isn't
cheese and milk substitutes
aren't animal products, they
cannot be labeled as milk
or cheese in Europe.
Alexander Anton
makes sure of it.
He's a lobbyist for the
European milk industry.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Pleasure, flavor, health.
This is the trial of milk.
Milk is unique in its
nutritional makeup, a product
that is traditional, that we've
been farming for 10,000 years,
and that has a natural basis.
All 1,200 French
cheese varieties
are made from the
natural food milk.
Whether soy, oat,
or almond milk,
there are concrete
economic interests
which have led to a
true labeling war.
The description milk is only
allowed with coconut milk
for traditional reasons.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> There's no real
disagreement on this.
The situation is clear.
The description of milk and milk
products is consumer-protected.
As a consumer, I
have to be informed
that when I buy cheese,
butter, or milk,
that these are real
dairy products.
Jan Bredack considers the
argument as superfluous and not
in the interests
of the consumer.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] >>
We're not allowed to write
on our products that
they're cholesterol-free,
although they are.
That would be a
competitive disadvantage
for the meat and dairy industry
as their products contain
cholesterol.
The second issue relevant
for me here in Germany
is the tax disadvantages.
For a milk substitute,
you pay 19% VAT.
For milk from a sheep,
goat, or cow, you pay 7%.
These are things that have been
secured where the lobbyists
have done their work well.
Consumer issues like
these are negotiated
in the corridors of the EU
in Brussels and in court.
It is a billion-dollar industry.
The already shaken
milk farmers in Europe
are fighting for the image
of milk as a quality product.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Misdescribing products that
rely on a good reputation,
that have acquired the good
image of milk is not new.
We've known this since
the era of Napoleon III.
For him, good butter was too
expensive for his troops,
so margarine was invented.
Since Napoleon III,
cheap margarine
has conquered its
place in many kitchens,
and history seems to
be repeating itself.
This Ruegenwalder
Muehle is a symbol
for the traditional meat and
sausage industry in Germany.
The business has been
undergoing radical change
since its marketing and
development head, Godo Roben,
added vegetarian
and soon vegan meats
to the company's repertoire.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We've been producing
meats for 182 years.
And when I came up
with the idea that we
should make vegetarian products,
there were murmurs of why?
But the numbers
justified so easily.
It's not the 7 million
vegetarians the 1 million
vegans, but the 14 million
flexitarians that are saying,
I want to consume
less meat and sausage.
A serious argument
is you don't want
to lose, to the cheese
and Nutella industry,
but you want to offer them
contemporary products.
An appointment at the
Ruegenwalder base.
A challenge for vegan
blogger Anna-Lena Klapp.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I would like to see how
seriously they take this.
How do they even do it?
How is the production of
these foods different?
And yes, what is the motivation?
>> Every week, the company
processes around 450 tons
of pork and poultry.
Pate and ham are ever
the favorite classics.
Anna-Lena finds it hard to
even look at these products.
But the enterprise already
has 11 meatless variations
in its repertoire, two
of which are vegan.
It took three years for the
first vegetarian sausage
to be brought to the market.
For Anna-Lena, the change
can't come fast enough.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> This is where the animals
that you want to free are still
processed.
It is a funny
feeling, but I think
it is moving in the
right direction.
And I hope that in the
future, animal products
will decrease a lot.
And that one day this
venture will only produce
vegetarian or vegan products.
>> However, the resistance
against vegetarian and vegan
products was considerable,
even within the company.
Yet, success was on
Godo Roben's side.
The company has had
to hire more staff
to produce the non-meat
products in three shifts.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We haven't had much
growth in recent years.
We would have had
about 1%, 2% plus.
Now that we've introduced
vegetarian products,
our growth is in double figures.
We make about 50
million euros a year
with our vegetarian products.
That's 20% of our total revenue.
So there's really something
happening in Germany,
it's not about to stop.
Aside from the vegetarian
offer, the company
is increasing its vegan platter.
Vegan makes business sense.
Veganz founder, Bredack, wants
to conquer the European market
with his vegan supermarkets.
France is right at
the top of the list.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> We're in talks
with Carrefour.
It's not that far-fetched,
the interest is there.
But there's more from
Carrefour in Spain,
but that has an
effect on France.
I say it's France's turn.
In Berlin, this vegan
future has already begun.
Whether lupines or soy milk,
plant-based cheese or meat
substitute, the array
of products is growing
and sales are booming.
Many others are jumping
aboard the trend.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Veganism is a trend,
yes, but it's a megatrend,
meaning we'll see it run a
minimum of about 30 years.
And if you look
at the reason why
people are changing their
lives and their behavior,
then the first priority is their
health and their well-being,
but environmental aspects are
also being put on the table.
Our consumption is
leaving a footprint,
and you can't wipe it away.
There's more and more
people in the world
and not enough resources.
And the focus on feeding animals
means some people go hungry.
Once we number 10 billion
people in 20, 30, 40 years,
the planet will be
too small for us,
and we will have to
consume directly,
meaning we have to
eat plants themselves
because they have a
much higher yield.
For a kilo of meat, I
need 16 kilos of grain
and 20,000 liters of water.
It's just not there.
For Anna-Lena
Klapp and her boss,
Sebastian Joy from the German
Vegetarian Union, the animal
sanctuary and freed animals
are worthy of his story
for this circular.
Here, pictures can portray
what bland numbers often can't.
One tangible example says
more than any statistics.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Stalin once said, the death
of one person is a tragedy,
but the death of a million
people is a statistic.
It's just the same for animals.
If you state how many animals in
Germany, it's over 800 million
are slaughtered
every year and eaten.
It's an incomprehensibly
large number.
The individual can't grasp it.
Whilst here in the
animal sanctuary,
you can see every animal,
make a connection to it,
and realize that
it's a sentiment
being that just wants
to live and be happy.
The story is too
good not to be used.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We try not to point fingers,
but reach out our hands when we
say, look, people, just try
replacing milk or eggs or meat
with tasty alternatives.
The arguments to do
so are convincing.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The consumption
of animal products--
milk and meat and eggs--
produces more greenhouse
gases than all transport,
ships, cars,
aeroplanes combined.
A vegetarian diet can balance
one's own carbon footprint
by 50%, a vegan diet up to 90%.
But what if we could eat
meat whilst also preventing
animal cruelty?
Impossible?
At the University of
Maastricht in Holland,
Professor Mark Post is working
on a decidedly non-vegan
alternative to save the
planet and combat hunger--
artificial meat made
from cows' stem cells.
>> All of us, but also cows,
have in their muscle stem
cells.
They are designated
skeletal muscle stem cells,
they can only produce
muscle tissue.
And they're sitting
there doing nothing,
waiting to repair the
muscle when it's injured.
That's their role in life.
They can do that
inside the body,
but they can also do
that outside of the body.
>> Professor Post presented
the fruits of his labors
to the world press in 2014.
The first hamburger
grown in the laboratory.
Cost-- $250,000 for one patty.
It took the scientists
three months
to grow the hamburger
from the stem cells,
quicker than a cow would
ever be able to do it.
Fundamentally, the
technique could also
work with chicken and lamb.
The possibilities are endless.
>> So we have been able from
that small sample to culture
sufficient cells
for that hamburger,
and if you do the math,
if you calculate--
and the number of doubling
that you can get out
of these cells,
that small sample
could produce 10,000
kilos of meat.
>> Two stem cells could
potentially become 10 tons
of meat, and no cow, sheep,
or chicken would need to die
for it.
Will the meat of
tomorrow no longer come
from the barn or the
field, but the bioreactor?
What consequences does this
technological breakthrough
have for the environment?
>> We have 1 and 1/2
billion cows on this planet.
And this technology still
would require some cows,
because they need to
donate those stem cells.
But you could go down from 1
and 1/2 billion to, say, 30,000,
35,000 across the world.
>> Could Mark Post's
visions become a reality?
Can the greenhouse gases
caused by mass farming
be drastically reduced?
Artificial meat from
bioreactors-- ethical,
efficient, and ecological.
Could eating meat be a way to
prevent animal cruelty and save
the planet?
Only if it tastes
good and comes cheap.
>> With the current
technology, if we scale up,
the cost would be
about $65 per kilo--
so about 50 euro per kilo.
Which is still expensive, it's
still 30 times more expensive
than what we have
right now, but that's
with the current
technology, and we already
know which innovations
we need to--
we are looking for to
get that price down.
>> The consumption of animal
products such as meat, milk,
and eggs creates more greenhouse
gases than all transport--
ships, cars, and
aeroplanes combined.
And some people are
already dreaming
of making milk and
cheese in bioreactors.
No animals needed at all.
>> I think it's actually a great
idea to make the milk proteins
by bacteria or yeast or
whatever organism it is--
is used to produce that.
And add water and other
substances and fat, maybe,
to create the same product.
I think that's a great idea,
because milk is a problematic--
probably as problematic as meat
is a problematic commodity.
>> The Bay Area around
San Francisco is one
of the world's
hotbeds of innovation.
This is where the computer
revolution of the 20th century
took place--
Apple, Intel, Google, and Coke.
In the 21st century,
the biotech revolution
is to follow the digital
one, and once again, it all
starts in an old garage.
Near Berkeley
University, biohackers
come together to make vegan
cheese out of marine mammals.
What may seem impossible
at first glance
could become a reality when
you take a closer look.
>> The narwhal is just
because it's kind of cold--
because we can do it.
We can do any mammal that
has had its genome sequenced.
And so this was
really sort of to get
people excited about the idea.
Hey, we can do something
really different because--
yeah, it's probably very
hard to milk a narwhal.
I don't think anybody's ever
made narwhal cheese before.
So this is showing
that not only can we
reproduce things that
already exist in the world--
cow milk cheese, we can
do some really new things
that are really only
possible this way.
>> Basically this is
pretty much like the--
>> Modern gene technology
makes it possible,
as does the internet.
One can buy genetic mammal
material, exactly the part
the cow's the milk
proteins, proteins
that can be mass-reproduced
within bacteria or yeast cells.
>> It's pretty easy to order the
plasmid complete with your gene
of interest in it.
So that's what we've done here.
So it's got that gene
that tells the yeast how
to make this particular
protein, and it's
got a few other features, too.
It actually tells the yeast once
that protein's made, kick it
out of the yeast cell.
That makes it easier
to purify afterwards.
>> At no stage in the process
is an animal involved.
Theoretically, it should be
possible to genetically create
vegan milk proteins
in yeast cells,
just as insulin is being
produced in yeast cells
already.
Today, the biohackers from the
Counter Culture Lab in Berkeley
are locking a human breast
milk protein into a yeast cell.
It would be the first component
of artificial human breast
milk that together with
plants, oil, sugar, and water,
could form the basis
for a vegan cheese.
>> 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
>> That's it, right?
>> Yes!
>> 4.9, almost exactly right.
Good time.
>> Awesome!
Ah!
>> OK.
>> Phew!
>> OK, so now we pull it out--
>> And I'm still alive.
[LAUGHS]
>> The theoretical path to
making vegan cheese is known.
The practical implementation
with donated equipment
from the biotech industry
seems controllable, possible.
Even the implementation
of a protocol
by a colorful mix of academic
amateurs, biocomputer
scientists geologists, software
engineers, and chemists
is possible.
Yet, milk proteins
are very complex.
If it were that simple, we
would already have vegan cheese.
A long and rocky
road lies ahead.
>> The real challenge is this.
It will be isolating
the proteins,
getting them really pure after
they come out of the yeast,
because of course the yeast is
making other protein as well.
And then reconstructing
these several proteins
to make the larger
protein structure.
And this has been done
in the literature when
these proteins have been
isolated individually
from the mammalian sources, but
we've never done it from yeast.
And if we get everything
exactly right,
it will work the same way,
but if anything's a little bit
different, we may have
to do some extra work
to reconstruct those micelles.
>> The relevant American
supervising body, the FDA,
has no concerns
regarding vegan cheese,
but cheese from human breast
milk meets resistance.
These are cultural reservations
that weigh heavily on this.
As heavily as the
reservations of many
a Frenchmen about a
vegan cooking school
being set up in Normandy,
the heart of the French milk
and cheese industry.
This is exactly what
Deborah Pivain has done.
She's convinced that fantastic
French cuisine does not
have to exhaust itself
by serving ortolan
drowned in Armagnac forever.
The universe of the
vegan taste spectrum
has barely been explored.
>> Can we have every taste?
No.
Right now we cannot
have every taste,
we cannot have every texture.
But because we're so adventurous
and we want to find new things,
we do cooking with things
that no one would ever
have thought of using before.
So we are not reduced to using
a small amount of products.
On the contrary, the
door is wide open.
>> In this sense, veganism could
even be the key to a whole new
gourmet cuisine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]